
dailystar.co.uk
North Korea: Donald Trump sends letter amid claims Kim LIED about nukes
Martin Coulter
4-5 minutes
China and Russia must get tough with North Korea says expert

The US State Department said Trump’s response to Kim had been hand-delivered to North Korea’s top diplomat. 

Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert said Trump’s written response was given to North Korean Foreign Minister Ri Yong Ho at an Asian security forum in Singapore on Saturday. 

The White House said earlier in the week that Kim had sent a new letter to Trump and that the president had written a response.

Foreign minister Ri Yong Ho fired back, telling delegates the US “is raising its voice louder for maintaining sanctions” against North Korea. 

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo earlier warned Russia and China to maintain sanctions against the rogue state in an effort to make sure it gives up its nukes. 

TRUMP-KIM GETTY
RESPONSE: Trump sent the letter to N Korea's foreign minister on Saturday

A bombshell UN report claims North Korea has not stopped nuclear missile programmes. 

And the Hermit Kingdom has even resorted to a “massive increase” of illegal ship-to-ship transfers in the face of the strict rules.

Weeks after nuke-nut Kim Jong-un and US President Donald Trump met for the first time, the confidential report has threatened a major setback.

Although North Korean leader vowed to denuclearise, his country has gone on to carry out secret sea transfers of petroleum products and coal.

And the Hermit Kingdom has even resorted to a “massive increase” of illegal ship-to-ship transfers in the face of the strict rules.
HISTORY MADE: Donald Trump and Kim Jong-un meet for first time EVER
 

Donald Trump and Kim Jong-un make history in the first sitting between US and North Korean leaders, as they negotiate the end of the nuclear stand-off.

1 / 18
Kim Jong Un shakes hands with US President Donald Trump after taking part in a signing ceremony AFP/Getty Images

Kim Jong Un shakes hands with US President Donald Trump after taking part in a signing ceremony

It stated: ”(North Korea) has not stopped its nuclear and missile programs and continued to defy Security Council resolutions through a massive increase in illicit ship-to-ship transfers of petroleum products, as well as through transfers of coal at sea during 2018.

Among the groups in the Middle East and Africa the reports says North Korea is trying to sell weapons to is Yemen's Iran-backed Houthi rebels.

And despite a textile export ban, the North exported more than $100million (£77m) in goods between October 2017 and March 2018 to China, Ghana, India, Mexico, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkey and Uruguay, the report revealed.

The report was submitted to the UN Security Council's North Korea sanctions committee late on Friday in the US.
Related articles

    Overwatch Summer Games 2018 release date, start time: PS4, Xbox One, PC event coming SOON
    Russian fighter jets scrambled FIVE TIMES to chase away 22 enemy planes
    Nuke nut Kim LIED? North Korea has NOT stopped nuclear programmes – SHOCK report by UN
    China BANS Winnie the Pooh movie over meme mocking President Xi 

