
usatoday.com
U.S., North Korea trade barbs over sanctions, denuclearization pace
Doug Stanglin, USA TODAY
5-6 minutes
Pompeo,Ri meet in Singapore

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, left, greets North Korea's Foreign Minister Ri Yong-ho as they prepare for a group photo at the 25th ASEAN Regional Forum Retreat in Singapore Aug. 4, 2018.(Photo: Joseph Nair, AP)

Amid smiles and diplomatic niceties, U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and his North Korean counterpart exchanged barbs and accusations Saturday in Singapore.

Washington warned no sanctions would be lifted until North Korea fully denuclearizes and Pyongyang countered it would not be bullied.

At a security conference in the same city-state where President Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un met two months ago for a historic summit, Pompeo's delegation also delivered a letter from Trump to Kim.

Although Trump has declared North Korea "is no longer a nuclear threat," Pompeo and North Korean foreign minister Ri Yong Ho made it clear in remarks to the the annual ASEAN Regional Forum that the two sides remain far apart on the issue.

Pompeo's comments came one day after a report by experts monitoring U.N. sanctions against North Korea said Pyongyang is continuing with both its nuclear and missile programs. It also said the North was violating sanctions by transferring coal at sea and flouting an arms embargo and financial sanctions.

    I had the chance to speak with my #DPRK counterpart FM Ri Yong Ho @asean today. We had a quick, polite exchange. Our US delegation also had the opportunity to deliver @Potus reply to Chairman Kim’s letter. pic.twitter.com/1DiR6UDj4Q
    — Secretary Pompeo (@SecPompeo) August 4, 2018

In remarks to reporters in Singapore, Pompeo  said the U.S. has new, credible reports Russia is violating the sanctions by allowing joint ventures with North Korean companies and issuing new permits for North Korean guest workers. He said Washington would take “very seriously” any violations, and called for them to be roundly condemned and reversed.

The secretary, in his speech, warned that no sanctions would be lifted until North Korea fully and finally denuclearizes.

Although Pompeo had already left for Indonesia by the time Ri spoke, the North Korean diplomat pulled no punches. 

“Confidence is not a sentiment to be cultivated overnight,” he said. “In order to build full confidence between the DPRK and the U.S., it is essential for both sides to take simultaneous actions and phased steps to do what is possible one after another.” North Korea’s official name is the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK).

“Only when the U.S. ensures that we feel comfortable with and come close to it, will we be able to open our minds to the U.S. and show it in action,” he said.

The U.S. has previously rejected calls for a phased approach, insisting on maintaining the sanctions until the North delivers on its commitments.

“What is alarming, however, is the insistent moves manifested within the U.S. to go back to the old, far from its leader’s intention,” Ri said.

1 of 518

Autoplay

Show Thumbnails

Show Captions
Last SlideNext Slide

518 Photos

Life in North Korea: What you are allowed to see

The North Korean diplomat said the U.S. has maintained hostility instead of responding in kind to North Korea’s suspension of nuclear tests and missile launches and other goodwill gestures, such as the return of suspected remains of American troops killed in the Korean War.

“The United States, instead of responding to these measures, is raising its voice louder for maintaining the sanctions against the DPRK and showing the attitude to retreat even from declaring the end of war, a very basic and primary step for providing peace on the Korean Peninsula,” he said.

He also accused Washington of taking “extremely inappropriate moves” by discouraging countries from sending high-level delegations to the North’s 70th anniversary celebrations in September.

Pompeo later tweeted from Indonesia that the two men "had a quick, polite exchange” and noted that the U.S. side had delivered Trump's letter for Kim.

At the forum, Philippine Foreign Secretary Alan Peter Cayetano weighed in on the dispute between Washington and Pyongyang, saying the rapprochement between the two countries, along with completion of a negotiating draft of the code of conduct, are a breakthrough.

But he added that “like any other breakthrough in diplomatic negotiations, they may lead to something great, they may lead to nothing.”

Contributing: The Associated Press

CLOSE

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo says while the U.S. is engaged with "patient diplomacy" with North Korea, he pledged not to let negotiations "drag out to no end." (July 25) AP

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2Krw6zL
