
ft.com
North Korea accuses US of backtracking on Trump-Kim summit
Stefania Palma in Singapore and Bryan Harris in Seoul 11 hours ago
4-5 minutes

North Korea’s foreign minister has hit out at the US for focusing on the complete denuclearisation of the Korean peninsula, after a leaked UN Security Council report accused Pyongyang of continuing its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes in violation of sanctions.

North Korea used its first ever attendance at the Asean foreign ministers’ meeting in Singapore to attack the US, in a sharp shift in tone from the conciliatory approach of the historic Trump-Kim summit in June.

Ri Yong Ho said it was alarming that the US was returning to hostile ways, “far from its leader’s intentions”, by maintaining sanctions on Pyongyang — a measure Mike Pompeo, US secretary of state, has called for throughout the Asean meetings.

“The DPRK-US joint statement should not be permitted to fall prey to the American internal politics,” said Mr Ri, adding that “as long as the US does not show in practice its strong will to remove our concerns, there will be no case whereby we will move forward first unilaterally”.

The foreign minister said North Korea had shown goodwill in the moratorium on nuclear and rocket launch tests and in the dismantling of nuclear test grounds.

Mr Ri accused Washington of focusing on the complete denuclearisation of the Korean peninsula and the recovering of US remains while ignoring two further points in the Singapore accord, namely establishing new North Korea-US relations and building a stable peace regime on the Korean peninsula.

A confidential six-month UN Security Council report, which was seen by several US media outlets on Saturday said North Korea had continued to develop its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes in violation of UN sanctions.

The report said that Pyongyang was also engaged in the large-scale ship-to-ship transfer of oil products and had allegedly been selling arms to militias in Sudan, Libya and Yemen.

The document will add to a mounting body of evidence suggesting North Korea has not been sincere in its pledges to abandon its arsenal of advanced weapons, which last year strained tensions with the US.

The Washington Post earlier this week cited US intelligence reports that Pyongyang was building at least one liquid-fuelled intercontinental ballistic missile at a facility to the north of the capital.

Open source imagery experts have detected increased activity and construction at the site in the Sanmun neighbourhood.

However US officials have remained optimistic, with secretary of state Mike Pompeo on Saturday saying “work has begun”.

“The process of achieving denuclearisation of the Korean peninsula is one that I think we have all known would take some time”.

The UN report was critical of the regime’s activities in the first half of 2018, a period which coincided with Pyongyang’s diplomatic overtures to Washington and Seoul.

“[North Korea] has not stopped its nuclear and missile programs and continued to defy Security Council resolutions through a massive increase in illicit ship-to-ship transfers of petroleum products, as well as through transfers of coal at sea during 2018,” said the report, according to Reuters.

Pyongyang is subject to multilateral sanctions that have begun to take a toll on its fragile economy.

A report from South Korea’s central bank last month said that North Korea suffered its sharpest economic contraction in 20 years last year, shrinking 3.5 per cent.

However Beijing and Moscow look poised to loosen sanctions — a development that Mr Pompeo warned against on Saturday.

“We expect the Russians and all countries to abide by the UN Security Council resolutions and enforce sanctions on North Korea,” he said.
